---
date: '2023-06-14T16:49:59.817Z'
title: A Military Veteran's Perspective on Agile Development
tagline: and a brief history of Napoleon's Grande Armée
preview: >
  Napoleon’s Contribution to Fundamental Organization Change


  It is important for this post to have a brief history of Napeolon’s Grande
  Armée, based on principles created by Jacques Antoine Hippolyte, Comte de
  Guibert. These are the foundations upon with the Military’s Staff Shop system
  is based. I will try to keep this simple and brief, apologies in advance.
image: >-
  https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/w_1272,c_limit,f_webp,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F03d118ba-ebb9-4a03-9b0f-ed7cc2673602_480x320.jpeg
---
#New Blog #SoftwareDevelopment #FrontendDevelopment #BackendDevelopment #Agile #Veteran #USArmy 
Intelligence Analysis

For the purpose of this post, I suppose, it’s important to tell you about myself. I am an Army Veteran and a former United States Intelligence Analyst of roughly 8 years. Intelligence, in this situation, means information, but is not limited to information of a singular source. An army intelligence analyst works like a detective, investigating different pieces of information to put together a clear picture of what's happening in a particular situation.

Their job involves collecting data from a variety of sources, such as reports, interviews, and surveillance. They carefully study this information, and use specialized tools and techniques to organize and analyze the data, making sure it is accurate and reliable.

Based on their analysis, they create reports and briefings to present their findings to commanders and other decision-makers. These reports help the army understand potential threats, identify enemy activities, and develop strategies to counter them. Intelligence analysts also collaborate with other military units and intelligence agencies to share information and coordinate efforts.

If you’re reading this and you’re currently working in software development, or project management, or even product ownership, a lot of this probably sounds very similar to other roles and jobs you’ve seen in your own industry. The Intelligence Analyst is a Risk Analyst, a Product Owner, a Data Analyst, and all of the other jobs the Military will stack on top of a soldier’s already extremely full plate.

Napoleon’s Contribution to Fundamental Organization Change

It is important for this post to have a brief history of Napeolon’s Grande Armée, based on principles created by Jacques Antoine Hippolyte, Comte de Guibert. These are the foundations upon with the Military’s Staff Shop system is based. I will try to keep this simple and brief, apologies in advance.

As stated above, Napoleon built the Grand Armée on the principles of Comte de Guibert. Fundamentally, these principles were that a singularly focused, flexible and compartmentalized army of well-taken care of soldiers, who were cohesive and built bonds with one another, could prevail against any mercantile or peasant army that could be mustered against his French forces. At least, until other armies figured it out at Waterloo.

I digress.

The Problem with Mercenaries

Undesirable in both military organizations and digital product companies, conflicting loyalties present a challenge. The concept behind the corps system aimed to establish a self-sufficient entity capable of independent operation. Each individual corps served as a self-contained army, under the guidance of a marshal and staff corps, equipped with military components, internal command structures, and control networks. Despite their autonomy, the commander of each army corps remained aware of the overarching strategic plan and the current commander's intentions, ensuring aligned actions with those plans. These are similar to the principles of the Manifesto for Agile Software Development. 

This is also the system that the U.S. Army used to create its Staff Shops or “S Shops”, as they’re commonly referred.

Personnel (S1)

Intelligence (S2)

Operations and training (S3)

Logistics (S4)

Civil-military operations (S5)

Signal operations (S6)


An example of a Tactical Operations Center(TOC) in the military, in which each shop operates, individually and collaboratively, to support a mission. Photo taken from the Michigan National Guard
The modern military succeeds by tackling tasks the same way a group of developers might. A broad spectrum of soldiers, each collaborating with one another for a common goal, but bringing their individual expertise to the table. This allows all of the myriad parts of the Army machine to operate without stepping on one another’s toes, and with individual focus, the military is flexible, fast, and efficient.

Here’s the Good Stuff

If you are unfamiliar with the military, from personal experience, it may be extremely surprising to find out just how fast, flexible and modern the military structure is, so without further adieu:

Constant communication and collaboration is crucial in both the military and Agile development. In a battalion, effective teamwork and communication are vital for coordinating complex operations involving multiple units and disciplines. Each S shop within a battalion works closely with the others, sharing information and expertise to support the overall mission. Similarly, Agile development emphasizes cross-functional collaboration, where developers, testers, and stakeholders work together closely, promoting transparency and fostering collective ownership of the project's success. The collaborative nature of both battalions and Agile development fosters synergy, enabling individuals to leverage their diverse skills and knowledge for better outcomes.

Iterative Nature & Cyclic Planning are a core facet. In the military, battalions often employ the OODA (observe, orient, decide, act) loop, a decision-making process that emphasizes rapid iterations to gain a competitive advantage. Similarly, Agile development utilizes short iterations called sprints, where teams continually refine and improve their product based on feedback and insights gained from each iteration. This iterative mindset allows both battalions and Agile development teams to learn from their experiences, adapt their strategies, and make incremental progress towards their objectives.

Both battalions and Agile development prioritize adaptability. In the military, battalions must be capable of executing a wide range of missions and rapidly adjusting their tactics in response to changing circumstances. Similarly, Agile development encourages flexibility by breaking down projects into manageable iterations, allowing for continuous feedback and adjustments based on evolving requirements. This adaptability enables both battalions and Agile development teams to respond effectively to unforeseen challenges and deliver optimal results.

Both battalions and Agile development rely on effective information management. As an Intelligence Analyst, I experienced firsthand the critical role of information in military operations. Battalions depend on accurate and timely intelligence to make informed decisions and anticipate threats. Similarly, Agile development teams rely on continuous feedback and data-driven insights to make informed decisions about their software development process. By gathering, analyzing, and utilizing information effectively, both battalions and Agile development teams can enhance their situational awareness and improve their decision-making capabilities.

Both battalions and Agile development share a commitment to continuous improvement. In the military, after-action reviews (AARs) are conducted to evaluate large mission outcomes and identify lessons learned for future operations. In the immediate, following smaller missions, debriefings are conducted with the Intelligence Community to gather as much information as quickly as possible for the same purpose, as well as to disseminate learned lessons and intel to the rest of the military. This commitment to learning from past experiences and implementing improvements is mirrored in Agile development's emphasis on retrospectives. Agile teams regularly reflect on their processes and identify areas for improvement, fostering a culture of continuous learning and growth.

A Military Failure

While there are many similarities, there are some differences, and those differences can be catastrophic. By the nature of the military and war, soldiers are expected to be able to commit to a greater volume, variety and intensity of work. While unlikely, occasionally, the inability to have off-days, extreme work-conditions, or via harsh work-conflicts, soldiers become exhausted, thus risking their team-members’ lives and the mission at hand. While the lives of soldiers differ greatly from civilians, these can still be used as lessons for Agile teams and management.

A focus on team morale, where the Army fails more often than not, and Agile doubles down. I will give the Army what credit I think it’s due. They really do try to increase morale. More often than not, through forced fun-activities set up by the command that soldiers are required to participate in during their time off, wherein they may have a BBQ or play volleyball. The issue here is that a soldier’s rank doesn’t disappear on a volleyball court or at a BBQ. A private and a Colonel are still worlds apart. You cannot chat as two equal grown adults. There are invisible stressors and pressure about how to act, how to dress, how to enjoy yourself, that pervade every aspect of a soldier’s personal and professional life.

Agile is intended to boost the morale of your workers, by reducing the overall load on their plates, by allowing them a healthy work-life balance, and by ensuring the only thing they are working on are the things they need to be working on. While the military is able to operate in many ways similar to Agile, its biggest weaknesses are the places where it simply isn’t feasible.

Soldiers are often overloaded with work from many sources. Soldiers in or out of combat theaters(war zones) are expected to still maintain things like physical fitness, dress code, vehicle maintenance, weapon maintenance, weapon proficiency, and many more regardless of whether you’re an Intelligence Analyst or a Petroleum Specialist.

Agile values the individual. You want your coworkers to be focused, aware, able to work without roadblock and not distracted by one hundred other factors. In these ways, the Agile method is able to make a workplace that is healthier, both mentally and physically, for it’s people.

While the U.S. Army's battalions and S shops may seem distinct from Agile development at first glance, there are notable parallels when considering their adaptability, collaboration, iterative approach, information management, and commitment to continuous improvement. Drawing upon my experiences as a U.S. Army Veteran and former Intelligence Analyst, I recognize the value of these parallels and the potential for cross-pollination of ideas and practices between these domains. And really, any veteran should be able to easily adapt to the Agile mindset. Fundamentally, it is simply the same mindset as the military, with a roughly 4000% decrease in overall stressors!

Agile methodology advocates for self-motivated, cross-functional, and customer-focused team members. Agile also emphasizes the necessity of having a permanent, long-term team. The presence of group bonding, mutual trust, unity, and cohesion remains crucial in today’s digital economy. These are all things that are drilled into every soldier from the first day they enter bootcamp, to the last day before ETS(separation from the service).

This is my first major published piece, if you’ve read this far, thank you! Please share with other folks and follow if you liked what I’ve written.
