---
date: '2023-02-28T20:08:24.125Z'
title: 'Case Study: My Kung Fu Flix'
tagline: Fulfilling a Fan's Need
preview: >-
  My Kung Fu Flix is a movie recommendation app for fans of Kung Fu & Wuxia
  films. It allows you to view a synopsis of many different films, as well as
  their directors, genre, and see the poster for the films. You can also
  favorite films that you are interested in or have seen, adding them to your
  profile, which you can view in the profile tab. The application has been
  rendered in both Angular & React, showing off the versatility of the API, as
  well as my ability to work in both frameworks. 
image: 'https://i.imgur.com/yLaPEGk.png'
---
#New Blog #KungFu #KungFuFilms #Wuxia #Films #FilmApps 

- My Kung Fu Flix is a movie recommendation app for fans of Kung Fu & Wuxia films. It allows you to view a synopsis of many different films, as well as their directors, genre, and see the poster for the films. You can also favorite films that you are interested in or have seen, adding them to your profile, which you can view in the profile tab. The application has been rendered in both Angular & React, showing off the versatility of the API, as well as my ability to work in both frameworks.
- **Purpose of the case study**
    - The purpose of this case study is to review the steps that were taken to imagine, create and refine the My Kung Fu Flix application, the reasons behind it’s creation and the steps that could be taken in the future to refine and expand upon it.

## II. Background

- **History of kung fu movies**
    - The Chinese martial arts film genre(colloquially known in the United States as Kung Fu Films) dates back to the 1920s, with the development of the Shanghai film industry. These first wuxia (martial arts) films were set in ancient China, and drew heavily on Chinese folklore and classical literature, featuring fantastical and supernatural elements such as beasts and spirits.
- **Current market for movie-watching applications**
    - Currently the ability to find recommendations for Kung Fu & Wuxia films in America is dependent on seeking out other people who enjoy the genre, keeping tabs on the Asian film market or by locating one of the few Chinese film review sites, which are often under-staffed, despite the broad appeal of the movie genre. Other, equally niche markets, such as anime, have massive websites such as My Anime List(MAL) that facilitate for their medium what this app seeks to do for it’s own.

## III. Problem Statement

- **Need for an application dedicated to kung fu movies**
    - English speaking-people in the West do not have easy access to recommendations of new or interesting Kung Fu & Wuxia films, thus this application seeks to provide those things in an easy to manage package.

## IV. Solution

- **Development of the application was performed by myself as Frontend developer, Backend developer, and Frontend stylist.**
    - The Server-side API for MY KUNG FU FLIX was built upon utilizing [REST API](https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/api/what-is-a-rest-api), with a database built utilizing JavaScript, Node.js, Express, and MongoDB. The API is accessed via HTTP methods, e.g. GET, POST, PUT & DELETE. CRUD methods are used to retrieve data from the database and store that data in a non-relational way. The backend was completed within two weeks.
    - [Link to Github](https://github.com/ChefLuBu/movie_api)
    - The React-Redux version of the application, seen below, offers a streamlined and simple design, with the aforementioned features and a burger-button dropdown menu for accessing the user profile. It was developed before the Angular implementation and was built using Parcel, React, Redux, and SASS styling. It took approximately one month to complete the application’s front-end.
    - [Link to Github](https://github.com/ChefLuBu/myFlix-client)

    
    React Client for My Kung Fu Flix
    
    - The Angular version of the client, seen below, offers a more stylized version of the application. Taking inspiration from the 70’s era of Kung Fu films, the first to hit the United States, this is a retro-styled application with the same aforementioned features, in a visually dynamic style. It was built using the Angular CLI, Angular Material, Typescript, Typedoc and SASS Styling. It took approximately 3 weeks to complete.
    - [Link to Github](https://github.com/ChefLuBu/myFlix-Angular-client)
    
  
    
    Angular Client for My Kung Fu Flix
    
- **Key features of the application**
    - The initial landing page is a Welcome screen that allows new-user registration and login functions
    - Upon login authentication, the user is moved to the films view which displays all film cards and an icon showing any favorited films
    - film cards contain the following features and information:
        - Genre button: Opens a dialog with details about the genre of that film
        - A "Director" button, opening a dialog with details about the director of that film, including a summary, DOB & DOD where applicable
        - A "Summary" button, opening a dialog with a summary of that film
        - A "Favorite" button, toggling between adding and removing the film to/from favorite list
        - The title and film poster
    - The user can navigate to the profile view where they can:
        - Update their profile
        - Delete their account

## V. Implementation

- **Target audience and demographics**
    - The target audience for this application is the ever-growing and internationally aware audience of Martial Arts films. In the United States, thee primarily tend to be males, between the ages of 18 and 45, however there is an ever growing market in female audiences, that already exists throughout Asia, and being ahead of the curve in marketing to them is not to be under-estimated.

## VI. Results

- **User feedback and reviews**
    - “The only application of it’s kind, it definitely reflects your style and speaks to who you are as a person.” -  Christopher Abramson
    - “Very cool. I love the retro style and the way you made it your own” - Ted Walther

## VII. Conclusion

- **Summary of the case study**
    - This case study explores the development of My Kung Fu Flix, a movie recommendation app for fans of Kung Fu and Wuxia films. The app was built using both Angular and React, and features a streamlined design with various key features such as film cards with details about the genre, director, and summary. The app was positively reviewed and future prospects include marketing to a growing female audience and expanding the app's offerings.
- **Future prospects for the application**
    - Future prospects include developing a considerably larger API with a greater selection of movies as well as refining the look and feel of the app and creating more features for the profile page.
